KEP-78: Dynamically reclaiming resources (#331)
kubernetes-sigs/kueue: enhancements/78-dynamically-reclaiming-resources/README.md

# Dynamically reclaim resources of Pods of a Workload

## Table of Contents

<!-- toc -->
- [Summary](#summary)
- [Motivation](#motivation)
    - [Goals](#goals)
    - [Non-Goals](#non-goals)
- [Proposal](#proposal)
    - [Risks and Mitigations](#risks-and-mitigations)
- [API](#api)
- [Graduation Criteria](#graduation-criteria)
- [Testing Plan](#testing-plan)
    - [Unit Tests](#unit-tests)
    - [Integration tests](#integration-tests)
    - [E2E tests](#e2e-tests)
- [Implementation History](#implementation-history)
<!-- /toc -->

## Summary

> The resources of pods of a Workload are reclaimed by kueue after successful completion of the Pod. 

Author: Done

This is beneficial for workloads which cannot proceed due to the unavailability 
of the little resources for its corresponding pods and Workload does not get 

> admitted.

Author: Made the wording simpler.

Here after, *pods of a Workload* are synonymously used to refer *pods of a Job* and vice-versa because, 

> Job manages the Workload and the pods associated with Job are associated with the Workload. 

Author: Done

## Motivation

Currently, the resources owned by a Job are reclaimed by kueue only when the whole Job finishes.
For jobs with multiple pods, the resources will be reclaimed only after the last Pod
of the Job finishes. This is not efficient as the pods of parallel Job may have laggards
consuming the unused resources of the jobs those are currently executing.

### Goals

- Utilize the unused resources of the Job which running in kueue.

### Non-Goals

- A running Job on queue should not be preempted.
- The resources that are being used by a Job should not be allocated to any other Job.

## Proposal

> Reclaim the resources of the succeeded pods of a Job as soon as it completes its execution.

Reviewer: Some cases I didn't met but maybe worth considering: when job failed, all the pods should be restarted. If so, reclaiming the resources of succeed pods is not expected. Then we should provide an optional field for end-users to choose, like define a `reclaimPolicy` in workload, default to non-reclaim.

Author: Explained pod failure scenarios w.r.t fields restartPolicy, backoffLimit and activeDeadlineSeconds. But, as proposed, reclaiming of failed resources will not be done unless the job gets completed as either Failed or Succeeded.

Reviewer: Let me explain this clearly: when running some kinds of workloads(e.g. HPC), we can't tolerate pod failure, then we'll restart all the pods, at that moment, if some pods got succeed and we reclaimed their resources, with some probabilities, these pods may failed in creation for insufficient resources. 

But I'm ok with current implementations for a startup until we come up with more user cases.

Add a new field to the status of the Workload to count successful completion of 
pods of the Workload. The Job controller monitors the count of pods which have

> successfully completed its execution. The Job controller is responsible for updating

Author: I meant Kueue's Job controller only. Made the appropriate change.

> the status of the Workload object appropriately.

Author: Done

> Update our documentation to reflect the new enhancement.

Author: Removed

### Risks and Mitigations

There is a change in the functionality of reclaiming the cluster-queue resources.
The resources of a Job are reclaimed by kueue in an incremental manner(resources of each
Pod of a Job are reclaimed separately), as opposed to reclaiming the whole resources 
of the Job after its completion.

> The update logic to reclaim resources after a Job completion must be handled correctly.

Author: As per the changes proposed, I don't see any risk that might crash any component of Kueue or suddenly increases consumption underlying system's resources.
Hence, removed the section..

### API

A new field `CompletedPods` is added to the `WorkloadStatus` struct.

```go
// WorkloadStatus defines the observed state of Workload
type WorkloadStatus struct {
  // conditions hold the latest available observations of the Workload
  // current state.
  // +optional
  // +listType=map
  // +listMapKey=type
  Conditions []WorkloadCondition `json:"conditions,omitempty"`
  

>   // The number of pods which reached phase Succeeded or Failed.

Author: PodSet consist of name, podSpec and count. What fields can be reused here?

Is there a way to list pods belonging to a particular `PodSet`? If yes, then we can have counts of completed pods w.r.t PodSet. If there is no way, we can think of adding one.

We can have a struct field which can count the:
1. resources owned by a job
2. count of completed pods segregated according to PodSets.

What do you think?

  // +optional
  CompletedPods int32 `json:"completedPods"`
}
```

#### CompletedPods

`CompletedPods` stores the count of pods which have successfully completed its execution.

High level execution flow:
1. The completed pods in a Job is the count of Succeeded pods => sum(succeeded).
2. Update the Workload status object if job.sum(Succeeded) > wl.Status.CompletedPods
3. Handle the update event of Workload and update Workload status in cache.
4. Update clusterQueue quota for resource flavor for requests of Pod of a Workload in cache.

## Graduation Criteria

* The features have been stable and reliable in the past several releases.
* Adequate documentation exists for the features.

> * Test coverage of the features is acceptable.

Author: Removed

## Testing Plan

Dynamically reclaiming resources enhancement has unit and integration tests. These tests
are run regularly as a part of kueue's prow CI/CD pipeline.

### Unit Tests
Here is a list of unit tests for various modules of the feature:
* [Cluster-Queue cache tests](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/kueue/blob/main/pkg/cache/cache_test.go)
* [Workload tests](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/kueue/blob/main/pkg/workload/workload_test.go)

### Integration tests

> * Integration tests for Job controller are [found here](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/kueue/blob/main/test/integration/controller/job/job_controller_test.go)

Author: Added the required test scenarios.

> # Dynamically reclaim resources of Pods of a Workload

Reviewer 2: We added a template now https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/kueue/tree/main/keps/NNNN-template

Please move the file to keps/

Author: Moved to keps/ directory.

<!-- toc -->
- [Summary](#summary)
- [Motivation](#motivation)
    - [Goals](#goals)
    - [Non-Goals](#non-goals)
- [Proposal](#proposal)
    - [Pod Successful Completion Cases](#pod-successful-completion-cases)
        - [Job Parallelism Equal To 1](#job-parallelism-equal-to-1)
        - [Job Parallelism Greater Than 1](#job-parallelism-greater-than-1)
    - [Pod Failure Cases](#pod-failure-cases)
        - [RestartPolicy of Pods as Never](#restartpolicy-of-pods-as-never)
        - [RestartPolicy of Pods as OnFailure](#restartpolicy-of-pods-as-onfailure)
- [API](#api)
    - [ReclaimedPodSetPods](#reclaimedpodsetpods)
- [Implementation](#implementation)
- [Testing Plan](#testing-plan)
    - [Unit Tests](#unit-tests)
    - [Integration tests](#integration-tests)
- [Implementation History](#implementation-history)
<!-- /toc -->

## Summary

This proposal allows for the resources of Pods of a Workload to be reclaimed after successful completion of each of the Pods of a Workload. Freeing the unused resources of a Workload earlier may allow more pending Workloads to be admitted. This will allow Kueue to utilize the existing resources of the cluster much more efficiently.

> In the remaining of this document, *Pods of a Workload* means the same as *Pods of a Job* and vice-versa.

Reviewer 2: Just try to be consistent

## Motivation

Currently, the resources owned by a Job are reclaimed by kueue only when the whole Job finishes. For Jobs with multiple Pods, the resources will be reclaimed only after the last Pod of the Job finishes. This is not efficient as the Pods of parallel Job may have laggards consuming the unused resources of the Jobs those are currently executing.

### Goals

- Utilize the unused resources of the successfully completed Pods of a running Job.

### Non-Goals

> - Preempting a Job or Pods of a Job to allocate resource to a pending Workload.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Preempting a Workload or Pods of a Workload to free resources for a pending Workload.
```

- Partially admitting a Workload.

## Proposal

> Reclaiming the resources of the succeeded Pods of a running Job as soon as it completes its execution.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Reclaiming the resources of the succeeded Pods of a running Job as soon as the Pod completes its execution.
```

Hence, as seen from the above discussed Pod failure cases, we conclude that the Pods of a Job which fail during its execution, its resources are not immediately reclaimed by Kueue. Only when the Job gets marks as `Failed`, the resources of failed Pods will be reclaimed by Kueue.

## API

A new field `ReclaimedPodSetPods` is added to the `.status` of Workload API.

```go
// WorkloadStatus defines the observed state of Workload
type WorkloadStatus struct {
    // conditions hold the latest available observations of the Workload
    // current state.
    // +optional
    // +listType=map
    // +listMapKey=type
    Conditions []WorkloadCondition `json:"conditions,omitempty"`

    // ReclaimedPodSetPods are the pods (by PodSet name) which have
    //completed their execution successfully and resources of the pods
	//are reclaimed.
    // +optional
    ReclaimedPodSetPods ReclaimedPodSetPods `json:"reclaimedPodSetPods"`
}

> type ReclaimedPodSetPods map[string]struct{

Reviewer 2: Prefer an array to a map, like we are doing for conditions

Author: Any reason to prefer array over map. Like what are cons of using a map here?

We want to keep mapping between PodSet name and its completed pods. Can you tell how do you want to organize the data using array?

Reviewer 2: https://github.com/kubernetes/community/blob/master/contributors/devel/sig-architecture/api-conventions.md#lists-of-named-subobjects-preferred-over-maps

You can use `PodSet` as an example: https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/kueue/blob/main/apis/kueue/v1alpha2/workload_types.go#L26-L33

Author: thanks for the material. This clears my doubt.

    Count int

>     Pods []string

Reviewer 2: why do we need the pod names? That could be a lot of data.

Author: Pod names was kept to record the pods whose resources are reclaimed and avoid reclaiming again. But I agree, that could be lot pods.

Reviewer 2: The job controller API already counts the number of finished pods. Why not use that? https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/workloads/controllers/job/#job-tracking-with-finalizers

}
```

#### ReclaimedPodSetPods
`.status.reclaimedPodSetPods` holds the mapping between PodSet name to the count of Pods and Pod names that have successfully completed its execution and their resources have been reclaimed by Kueue. The names of Pods are recorded to identify the Pods whose resources have been reclaimed by Kueue. If a name of a Pod already exists in the list then the resources associated with the succeeded Pod have already been reclaimed by Kueue.

## Implementation

> The Workload reconciler will keep a watch(or `Watches()`) on the Pods of the Job. The Workload reconciler will process the events of the Pods and update `.status.reclaimedPodSetPods` field accordingly.

Reviewer 2: In the case of Job, why not just watch the Job status and observe the `.succeeded` field?

Author: Yes, changed the approach and watching the `.succeeded`field of the job status.

Reviewer: If we want to support other Jobs, we should watch them all, right? Why not achieve this through job reconciling. Today when job completed, we'll update workloads in Job reconciler, and workload controller will get update events. I think it's similar.

Actually, I prefer the original design, by watching the Pods of Job. This is self closed-loop with kueue. And if other Jobs don't support `.status.succeeded` field, they have to implement it when integrating with kueue.  

But the disadvantage is we don't know whether this is as expected. For batch Job, we know that the succeeded pods can be reclaimed, but for other Jobs, we don't know.

Reviewer 2: We don't even know that for Job, because parallelism can be different from completions. So understanding the specific API is necessary.
